ARIA state or property: various editorial improvements (#2012)
auto-wcag/auto-wcag: _rules/aria-state-or-property-valid-value-6a7281.md

## Applicability

This rule applies to any [WAI-ARIA state or property][] that has a non-empty ("") [attribute value][], and that is specified on an [HTML or SVG element][].

## Expectation

Each test target has an [attribute value][] that is valid according to its [WAI-ARIA value type][value type].

> **Exception**: For `ID Reference` and `ID Reference List` value types, if the test target is not a [WAI-ARIA required states and properties][] for the [semantic role][] of its element, no ID referenced elements are required. Otherwise at least one of the elements with the given IDs exists in the same [document tree][] or in the same [shadow tree][] as the test target's element.

Reviewer: To fully close #1849, I think we need to consider `aria-controls` as not required on closed `combobox` (and thus include it in this exception).
This matches the `combobox` authoring practice, and follows suit with changes made on ARIA 1.3 on `combobox`. And this is what we discussed on [June 23rd](https://www.w3.org/2022/06/23-act-r-minutes.html#item06).

From the [authoring practices](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/combobox/#wai-aria-roles-states-and-properties-6) (second bullet):
> Note that `aria-controls` only needs to be set when the popup is visible.

ARIA Issue and PR: https://github.com/w3c/aria/issues/1334 / https://github.com/w3c/aria/pull/1335

Author: That's a fair point!

## Assumptions

There are no assumptions.

## Accessibility Support

Some user agents treat the value of `aria-*` attribute as case-sensitive (even when these are not ID) while some treat them as case-insensitive.

## Background

> Using invalid ARIA attribute values is often the result of a typo or other developer error. These attributes are then either ignored, or a default value is assumed by browsers and assistive technologies. This often means that a state or property which should exist is missing or has an unexpected value. This can cause issues under [success criterion 1.3.1 Info and Relationships][sc131] or [4.1.2 Name, Rule Value][sc412]. If the default value for invalid attribute values happens to match the author's intention for the value, there will not be an accessibility issue.

Reviewer: That almost sounds like 1.3.1 and 4.1.2 should be secondary requirements 😄

Author: That's what I was going for! They are secondary requirements after all. 😉

## Applicability

This rule applies to any [WAI-ARIA state or property][] that has a non-empty ("") [attribute value][], and that is specified on an [HTML or SVG element][].

## Expectation

> Each test target has an [attribute value][] that is valid according to its [WAI-ARIA value type][value type], except if one of the following is true:

Reviewer 2: The following are descriptions, not conditions that can be evaluated to true or false.

```suggestion
Each test target has an [attribute value][] that is valid according to its [WAI-ARIA value type][value type], except in the following instances:
```

- <dfn id="off6ek:id-reference">ID Reference</dfn>: For `ID Reference` value types an ID referenced elements is only required for `aria-controls` with [semantic][semantic role] `scrollbar` elements, and with [semantic][semantic role] `combobox` elements that have an `aria-expanded` [attribute value][] of `true`. The ID referenced element must exist in the same [document tree][] or [shadow tree][] as the test target's element.

> - <dfn id="off6ek:id-reference-list">ID Reference List</dfn>: For `ID Reference List` value types, no ID referenced elements are required.

Reviewer: I feel the exceptions are getting somewhat out of hand and hard to read. Trying something in a different direction to see where it goes…

> For each test target, depending on its type, either:
> - the type is neither ID reference, nor ID reference list, and the value is valid; or
> - the type is ID reference, and the attribute is required, and this is not `aria-controls` on a `combobox` with `aria-expanded != true`, and the value is an existing `id`; or 
> - all other cases pass.

(plus adding Background note that currently no ID reference list is required, and that apart from combobox, the only required ID reference is `aria-controls` on a `scrollbar`)

I prefer listing the combobox as an exception as it makes the rule more future proof (if a new required ID ref comes up, we don't need to change the rule)

---
Maybe it can be make clearer by splitting the requirements:

> Expectation 1
> For each test target, either the type is ID reference/ID reference list; or the value is valid.
>
> Expectation 2
> For each test target, either the the type is not ID reference, or it is not required, or it is `aria-controls` on an closed `combobox`, or the value is an existing `id`.

(again with Background note to explain the reasoning and effect)
This one might makes it harder to see when Expectation 2 triggers since it gets all the negation 🤔

## Assumptions

There are no assumptions.

## Accessibility Support

Some user agents treat the value of `aria-*` attribute as case-sensitive (even when these are not ID) while some treat them as case-insensitive.

## Background

Using invalid ARIA attribute values is often the result of a typo or other developer error. These attributes are then either ignored, or a default value is assumed by browsers and assistive technologies. This often means that a state or property which should exist is missing or has an unexpected value. This can cause issues under [success criterion 1.3.1 Info and Relationships][sc131] or [4.1.2 Name, Rule Value][sc412]. If the default value for invalid attribute values happens to match the author's intention for the value, there will not be an accessibility issue.

> Only for [WAI-ARIA required properties][] with value types `ID Reference` and `ID Reference List` is there a requirement that the elements with the given IDs actually exists. For non-required properties, having the referenced element is optional. For example, `aria-errormessage` attribute on an `input` element may have a fixed value, but the element with the error message is only added to the page when an error actually occurred.

Reviewer: We should expand on that to explain the `combobox` exception.

#### Passed Example 1

The `aria-label` [attribute value][] of `Family name` is allowed for the `string` [value type][].

```html
<div role="textbox" aria-label="Family name"></div>
```

#### Passed Example 2

The `aria-required` [attribute value][] of `true` is allowed for the `true/false` [value type][].

```html
<div role="textbox" aria-required="true" aria-label="Family name"></div>
```

#### Passed Example 3

The `aria-expanded` [attribute value][] of `undefined` is allowed for the `true/false/undefined` [value type][].

```html
<div role="button" aria-expanded="undefined">A button</div>
```

#### Passed Example 4

The `aria-pressed` [attribute value][] of `mixed` is allowed for the `tristate` [value type][].

```html
<div role="button" aria-pressed="mixed">Partially pressed button</div>
```

#### Passed Example 5

> The `aria-errormessage` [attribute value][] is an `ID Reference` [value type][]. Because `aria-errormessage` is not a required property for `textbox`, an element with a matching ID is not required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `aria-errormessage` [attribute value][] is an `ID Reference` [value type][]. The presence of an element with a matching ID is not required by this rule.
```
The current version of the rule doesn't mention the fact that the property is required or not, so it shouldn't really be part of the description.

Reviewer 3: I agree with @Jym77 in that this feels like we're diluting things but I wouldn't block this either.

#### Passed Example 1

The `aria-label` [attribute value][] of `Family name` is allowed for the `string` [value type][].

```html
<div role="textbox" aria-label="Family name"></div>
```

#### Passed Example 2

The `aria-required` [attribute value][] of `true` is allowed for the `true/false` [value type][].

```html
<div role="textbox" aria-required="true" aria-label="Family name"></div>
```

#### Passed Example 3

The `aria-expanded` [attribute value][] of `undefined` is allowed for the `true/false/undefined` [value type][].

```html
<div role="button" aria-expanded="undefined">A button</div>
```

#### Passed Example 4

The `aria-pressed` [attribute value][] of `mixed` is allowed for the `tristate` [value type][].

```html

> <div role="checkbox" aria-pressed="mixed">Partially checked checkbox</div>

Reviewer 4: Did you mean to use `aria-checked` here or `role="button"`?  `aria-pressed` isn't valid for `role="checkbox"`

Author: Yes! That should have been a button. Copy/paste error I think.

```suggestion
<div role="button" aria-pressed="mixed">Partially pressed button</div>
```

<div id="item2">Bananas</div>
```

#### Passed Example 7

> The `aria-rowindex` [attribute value][] is a valid `integer` [value type][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `aria-rowindex` [attribute value][] of 2 is a valid `integer` [value type][].
```
matching the descriptions on previous examples.

<div id="item2">Bananas</div>
```

#### Passed Example 7

The `aria-rowindex` [attribute value][] of 2 is a valid `integer` [value type][].

```html
<div role="gridcell" aria-rowindex="2">Fred</div>
```

#### Passed Example 8

> The `aria-valuemin`, `aria-valuemax` and `aria-valuenow` [attribute values][attribute value] are a valid for a `number` [value type][].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `aria-valuemin`, `aria-valuemax` and `aria-valuenow` [attribute values][attribute value] are valid for a `number` [value type][].
```

```html
<div role="spinbutton" aria-valuemin="1.0" aria-valuemax="2.0" aria-valuenow="1.5" aria-label="Select a value"></div>
```

#### Passed Example 9

The `aria-current` [attribute value][] of `page` is a valid `token` [value type][].

```html
<a href="/" aria-current="page">Home</a>
```

#### Passed Example 10

> The `aria-relevant` [attribute value][] has a `text` and `removals`. Both are valid tokens for a `aria-relevant` `token list` [value type][].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `aria-relevant` [attribute value][] has a `text` and `removals` tokens. Both are valid tokens for a `aria-relevant` `token list` [value type][].
```

></div>
```

#### Passed Example 12

The `aria-controls` [attribute value][] on a collapsed `combobox` does not require the ID referenced element to exist.

```html
<label>
	Tag
	<input role="combobox" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="popup_listbox" />
</label>
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

The `aria-required` [attribute value][] of `undefined` is not valid for a `true/false` [value type][].

```html
<div role="textbox" aria-required="undefined" aria-label="A required textbox"></div>
```

#### Failed Example 2

The `aria-expanded` [attribute value][] of `collapsed` is not valid for a `true/false/undefined` [value type][].

```html
<div role="button" aria-expanded="collapsed">A button</div>
```

#### Failed Example 3

> The `aria-expanded` [attribute value][] of `horizontal` is not valid for a `tristate` [value type][].

Reviewer 2: The example has aria-pressed, instead of aria-expanded

The `aria-required` [attribute value][] of `undefined` is not valid for a `true/false` [value type][].

```html
<div role="textbox" aria-required="undefined" aria-label="A required textbox"></div>
```

#### Failed Example 2

The `aria-expanded` [attribute value][] of `collapsed` is not valid for a `true/false/undefined` [value type][].

```html
<div role="button" aria-expanded="collapsed">A button</div>
```

#### Failed Example 3

The `aria-expanded` [attribute value][] of `horizontal` is not valid for a `tristate` [value type][].

```html
<div role="button" aria-pressed="horizontal">An other button</div>
```

#### Failed Example 4

The `aria-rowindex` [attribute value][] of `2.5` is not valid for an `integer` [value type][] because it is a decimal number.

```html
<div role="gridcell" aria-rowindex="2.5">Fred</div>
```

#### Failed Example 5

The `aria-valuemin`, `aria-valuemax` and `aria-valuenow` [attribute values][attribute value] are `strings`. These should all be of the `number` [value type][] instead.

```html
<div role="spinbutton" aria-valuemin="one" aria-valuemax="three" aria-valuenow="two" aria-label="Choose a value"></div>
```

#### Failed Example 6

> The `aria-live` [attribute value][] of `page` is not a valid `token`, because `page` is a token for `aria-live`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `aria-live` [attribute value][] of `page` is not a valid `token`, because `page` is not a token for `aria-live`.
```
(maybe also add in the list of valid tokens for `aria-page` 🤔 )

Author: aria-pabe? This is a token of aria-current, But I think this is enough.

```html
<div role="main" aria-live="page"></div>
```

#### Failed Example 7

> The `aria-relevant` [attribute value][] has the `text` and `always` tokens. The `always` token is not valid for the `aria-relevant` `token list`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `aria-relevant` [attribute value][] has the two tokens `text` and `always`. The `always` token is not valid for the `aria-relevant` `token list`. In order to be a valid value, all tokens must be valid.
```

#### Inapplicable Example 3

> The `aria-checked` attribute does not have a value.

Reviewer 4: Not so much a question about this specific change, but I received a question from my team about the example as a whole. ARIA spec notes for aria-checked:
> undefined (default): The element does not support being checked.

The example to "Accept terms" that doesn't support being checked is strange. Does it not support being checked because it's currently disabled? Adding `aria-disabled="true"` would cause this rule to pass.

Author: I'm just going to use a different attribute here I think. You're right, an `undefined` aria-checked prop on a checkbox is odd.
